In the AlphaGo documentary, a striking moment is in Game 2 of the 2016 series between Lee Sedol and AlphaGo, as the program executes the now famous Move 37. This action surprised professional Go players since it derivates from centuries of human strategy convention. Some commentators went to the extent of calling it divine. In attempting to answer the question whether we can legitimately think of Move 37 as creative, I will first reflect on standard conceptions of creativity, and then evaluate AlphaGo in that concept.
One of the standard definitions of creativity is ¡°the use of imagination or original ideas to create something¡± (Creativity, 2025). In another formulation in psychology, creativity was defined as the production of something novel and valuable (Gaut, 2010). These two definitions focus on two factors: originality and effectiveness. To be creative, an action should be not a mere break of the existing patterns, but also should offer meaningful or successful outcomes in their context.
Move 37, when evaluated against these criteria, seems to be creative. First, it was highly original. The first impression from the professional players view it as a mistake, as it was so far away out of normal human play. This was, however, not an accidental decision. It arose out of AlphaGo¡¯s in-depth analysis of board positions through self-play, where atypical moves were able to be experimented without the bias of human convention. Second, it was effective. Move 37 essentially altered the balance of the game and many commentators conclude it as decisive in AlphaGo¡¯s victory. Thus, Move 37 was both new and convenient.
One might argue that the actions performed by AlphaGo cannot be considered creative, as the system lacks intentionality and subjective imagination. Philosophers like Searle could argue that AlphaGo would fail to understand the move it has made due to the lack of consciousness or semantics. Nonetheless, the approach applied in artificial intelligence focus less on subjective mental conditions, more on observable performance. By this criterion, the fact that Move 37 has been acknowledged as highly original and strategically brilliant by experts is already a testament to creativity.
Moreover, this week¡¯s linear regression shows that even sophisticated AI systems are function approximators that are trained on data by gradient descent at core. However, AlphaGo demonstrates that scale and architecture of data matter. After training on millions of self-play games, AlphaGo was capable of designing strategies previously unseen by man. The product is not evaluated based on the internal process of thought but on novelty and effectiveness.
Lastly, creativity in practice is evaluated socially. A poem or painting is creative from the perception of the human audience. Similarly, Go professionals immediately perceived Move 37 as astonishingly innovative. If the highest experts all say a particular act is creative, then from the criteria of that field, it is creative. AlphaGo achieved the highest benchmark available, the recognition of top practitioners of the world.
In conclusion, although AlphaGo is not imagining in human sense, Move 37 qualifies widely accepted definitions of creativity since it was both novel and successful. Its origin through self-play instead of human inspiration does not lessen its creativity. On the contrary, it challenges the boundary of creativity. It is perhaps not exclusively a human characteristic, but a characteristic of systems, in this case a artificial one, that develop novel, valuable solutions in complicated domains.

References
Creativity. (2025). In Merriam-Webster Dictionary. https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/creativity
Gaut, B. (2010). The philosophy of creativity. Philosophy Compass, 5(12), 1034¨C1046. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1747-9991.2010.00351.x

